so welcome everyone and um since a
little pause uh the pedagogies of care
uh series are back back on Museum of
care and tonight we are encountering and
meeting nomed and gonus we artists
Educators
researchers and co-founders of the
urbonas studio which is an
interdisciplinary research practice that
facilitates exchange among diverse nodes
of knowledge prod an artistic practice
in pursuit of projects that transform
Civic spaces and Collective
imaginaries uh both Nomad and ginus are
artists researchers ginus is also a
professor as Massachusetts Institute of
Technology um the program in art culture
and technology and they are both
co-founders of the or bonus Studio
together and U uh they both uh have
lectured extensively internationally uh
and and they are holding positions in
Norwegian University for Science and
Technology uh that is in the past
between 2005 and 2009 uh of course MIT
uh with which they both collaborate and
then um recently they also visiting
professors at vas Magnus University in
kaas NABA in Milan and other
universities around the world so they
have exhibited internationally in many
places from s Paulo Bal in which they
have participated twice Berlin Bal
Moscow Bal Leon guu Busan Tai Helsinki
Bales folkstone trian manifesta
documenta and other exhibitions so
literally almost everything you can
imagine as an artist and of course they
also have participated numerous times in
in Venice Bale U and
U um they have also received uh a number
of awards uh uh Lithuanian National
prize uh the best International artist
prize at guju benal and so on so forth
so why I wanted to invite nomeda and
gminas here uh to present their practice
because their practice since the very
beginning is not just kind of
traditional artistic practice but it is
community based one of the first
projects uh which brought us together
was called protest lab
and um protest laab archive afterwards
which was dealing with um uh the
privatization of the public space in
Lithuania where they are from um and
then uh also the other projects um
always have this kind of social and
political Dimension uh we have
collaborated together on the project uh
which is called Disobedience archive and
we have presented that project at MIT in
the fac facilities U and during that
period it was the moment of occupy
Boston and in which we participated
together and I think that uh also uh
kind of replies to the question why we
are presenting this practice here on the
uh Museum of care platform which is a
platform um dedicated and created by
Nika uh duosi and um uh dedicated to the
work and Legacy of David greber so uh
the practice of nomed and G Min Bonas is
uh not just interdisciplinary but really
very wide
um and open ended and today I wanted to
speak about one particular project uh or
since the series are called pedagogies
of care um I wanted to reconnect to an
experience of which I have been part of
which happened in 2018 in Venice for the
Venice Bal which was actually a pavilion
of lithu
uh for um the architecture BAL of that
year for which Nom andus presented a
project called The Swamp school which
was once again um a very interesting way
of how you could bring together uh not
just uh kind of pedagogies uh different
type of pedagogies but how to also
reflect on this um interrelationship
between different uh forms of life and
uh perhaps swamp as a metaphor is a very
interesting one uh which as we quoted
Henry too loves swamps as kind of places
which are always regarded as
um somehow uh not nonproductive places
or places to drain places to be afraid
of and instead um they showed how uh
swamps could be seen on the contrary uh
the habitats to a plure of beings and
there's a kind of metaphor in this very
dark times perhaps uh from which to
depart to have new ideas and to Drew
from and then perhaps I can give and
pass the floor to Noma and G Minas and
ask them to present their project the
swamp school and then leave the floor
also for the questions and then we can
also um connect uh their practice uh
which is extremely interesting uh also
to the um practice of David greber
towards the end so I would pass the
floor to no 0 minutes maybe um you can
tell a bit the story how you arve to
this project and why do you always also
whenever you work on the artistic
projects you always have this uh
Community Dimension uh to them um and
why and not just normal artistic
practice so maybe you can
[Laughter]
start that was funny yeah we should we
should start why we are always sending
in the mud right uh okay uh thank you
and for generous
introduction and you told everything
already so and thank you n and schlomo
and everyone behind the Museum of Kia
for inviting us uh to this uh talk and
uh well we are looking forward very much
to engage you and also the audience who
joining us
online yeah so uh as Andre already
mentioned but we work together and it's
been like for a while since a long long
time ago many not years but actually
decades when in 1993 we established the
Artist Run space and a collective Artist
Run Initiative one of the first ones
definitely in Lithuania but also maybe I
could say the first stst trans space in
the Baltic countries we have to discuss
with Andre this uh history at some point
but uh already then we were like really
interested in Collective and
organizational forms of
art
uh and uh in particular it was of course
uh in the context of the social economic
and political transformation that
Lithuania went through at that time
um and our experience was marked by also
ecological movements
U provoked by a Civic and environmental
collapse brought by CH Chernobyl
ecological disaster you remember well
perhaps that happening and also the war
in
Afghanistan So within this context we
started to develop our practice
pondering on ecological repair as a
response to social CR Rises and
considering art as infrastructure to
sustain ecology and maybe even
democracy uh so in this uh meeting of
today we will uh focus on our interest
on swamps and we'll try to unfold
amphibian pedagogy as we call
it um yeah so as Andre uh just framed
you know we try to unfold our interest
in this mediteran you know and while why
we are kind of like you know swamping in
in the mud so to speak um so perhaps the
you know we could
start looking into the history uh and
specifically that project of progress
and European
civilization uh was realized by draining
the swamps uh marshes and wetlands uh uh
dividing land into liquid and solid uh
butchering territory for
agriculture waterways and settlements
extracting and parceling it by expelling
the indigenous and autus all where
Technologies of progress and also of
colonization as um Andrew Pickering
argues to notice the swamp below our
feet is to switch to a non-dualist
ontology that is more appropriate uh to
the anthropocene
we argue that Art and Design must
embrace the swamp with its hybridity
complexity
queerness uh and a paradox as a way to
decolonize and deschool
itself so we are intentionally imprecise
using the term
swamp because Wetlands they can have
many names like wers marshes box fence
however the term swamp stands out for
its irritant subject D laud as we know
it from Garibaldi and molini as they
actively terraformed the Italian
landscape draining cleansing and
purifying of swamps getting rid of
things deemed queer and B was not only
embedded in the project of fascism but
in the rhetorics of
modernity as well and in the words of
brunal lur swamp is a critical Zone as
it reached the critical State due to the
exhaustion as a biotop and it this
critical or even irritant instrument as
it cries for a challenge of change of
perspective by standing critical to our
modernist
ontologies so going deeper into this
muddy subject of swamps it becomes
apparent that we are dealing with much
more than a metaphor signifying
organized mud it unfolds as well
organized biosphere and as a library of
diverse artistic cultural historic and
cybernetic knowledges as artists we
argue that the swamp is a multifaceted
lens for which we can view connections
and
interdependencies not only between life
forms and non-living matter that we can
discover in that we can discover the
complexity of our symbiotic Planet as
insightfully described by biologist Lin
margules but in the assemblage of
eclectic sources that are in service of
a speculative poetic ontology that
sketches possible implications for
thinking and acting in the present as in
words of sociologist Stuart
mcleen so the swamp challenge started
for us with a proposal for the
swamp ER school a school is a
form H which was part of or was like
representing lethania and the national
Pavilion in the architecture Bal in
Venice as Andre already mentioned in
2018 so we were probing there the
concept of design or architecture
developed byond
visuality situated in the center of
Venetian Lon and joined by a dozen of
schools and collaborators and the number
of participants
from diverse disciplines the school
developed pedagogical exercises that
engag sensorial immersive and embod
embodied knowing to imagine a future
learning environment that support
emerging forms of learning and urge us
towards a change of perspective so
school as a for also gave us opportunity
to experiment with the methodology of
learning there we developed concept of
amphibian pedag
that considers ideas of radical pedagogy
by Paulo fre and also extends them
towards trans and post disciplinarity as
well as learning from and with the
modern human considering transformative
effects of radical pedagogy as a core
component in our work such pedagogy is
argued as a critical and uh as activates
liberatory regimes by not only inviting
participants to discover how to particip
participate in transformation of their
worlds but also to build horizontal
relations and learn
together so the first
exercise took place in at the swamp
school where young Architects from
Lithuania like young Lithuanian
architects who actually invited us to
create them at this architecture
exhibition it were brought to aala
Mo in Lithuania where German botanist
Carl Albert
Weber in the beginning of 20th century
conducted the world's first scientific
study on
vlands this field trip to
uh
toala
Revisited Weber's footsteps and engaged
in the into the lesson on inst
known as a swamp Bible uh the book by
calet Weber reminded remained as a ma
major source for the science on raised
py box following humbold uh babber
studied interdependency of plants and
insects fungi soil and air focusing his
observation on spagnos cultures
stationed at brayman at the Imperial
prian OB obervatory of swamps he was
sent to the outskirts of East Pria
present day lethania to build scientific
Foundation or extraction and
colonization of
swamps Enchanted by the immersed
experience of the in touched Wilderness
smells colors sounds and fluctuating
ground he registers uh the beauty of the
landscape by meticulous study of slow
growth of plants queer shapes of trees
Optical phenomena of ignis fatum and
also Mourns for the end of prehistoric
times aded in the Pete through the
thousands of
years drawing on a CAPIC thinking the
school developed through the free
chapters and functioned as an open-ended
and everchanging infrastructure that
supported collaborative experiments in
design and artistic intelligence pooning
and adapting to imminent announ
ER the school
manuals we edited to students and our
class at MIT and organized them in three
chapters each to support a chapter of
the
school it is an ass assembled uh from
the foldable posters each featuring
short essays to discuss pedagogy of the
practice whether it's art or design or
Theory the form allows to disassemble
the manual and create a spatial
library of references where each part is
conceptualized through three essays to
engage tensions between the swamp and
the modernity swamp and pedagogy and
swamp as hybrid practice where the
historic models in the art and
architecture are being brought to
attention as they offer sensorial
engagement with the
world as for example Maran Amer with her
psycho acoustic phenomena that
destabilizes modernist notion of
production of space and opens up a swamp
radio chapter in the school here the
space is navigated with means of sound
inquiry where listening with the body
plays a role to enable the listening uh
to other species Yan vinderen engages
frequencies Beyond human hearing maucha
listening to environment in Venice is
practiced by Nicole Kier and listening
for the bones and body suggested by Sam
anger all interlocutors in this first
chapter of the swamp school that is
called swamp
radio um we also looking into the
practice of Juan dowy known for his
invisible architecture whose work
inquires Yanomami making of space
through daily rituals sounds movements
and production of space that uh becomes
through the interaction and
communication with other mod human
species PA in particular was interesting
to examine different forms of exhibition
and the intentionally we really wanted
to use the swamp as our site so for
example swamp punches uh host the
proposals of The
Architects ER who engaged in the swamp
workshops uh their proposals landed on
these ponchas thinking of how to embody
and perform their own designs as a way
to rec combine exhibition as a
representation through performance of
projections and ideas about the
Pavilion swamp punches is a basic gear
for the humid conditions of the swamp
research worn by The Architects
themselves they can reconstitute the
idea of the Pavilion anywhere in Venice
in that sense The Pavilion is not
bounded to the limitations of
architecture but as a swamp itself is
constantly leaking its boundaries
between National political or human
nonhuman
separations another reference you
fredman's people
architecture unfolded through the series
of workshops that invited children in a
creative process by Opening space for
play and learning through the
educational performances play shifts
children's creativity towards
development of symbiotic environment
amphibian man's
house by recognizing Advanced hybrid
thinking uh and also looking into Oscar
Hanson's pedagogy of open form this
Workshop created opportunities to
imagine construct and experience
architectural space that can accommodate
half human and half amphibian beings
through the worship children from the
area of
Castello um uh the workshop was opened
typically during Saturday and
Sunday um they investigated different
aspects of interspecies relationships
new forms of dwelling and the possible
coexistence of different forms of
life ER we had headquarters of the swamp
School ER at Castello on the Via galdi
and we decided to design the Inner Space
of the school as a playground and the
for the infrastructure of the school we
used
pipe as a almost like a symbol of
anthropos you could say that could
Channel The Sounds uh of
nature used as count utilitarian
infrastructure structure this
installation of
pipes becomes a platform for the W
School experience to scale
up ER so this you know pipe modules were
used for many
different activities in the school and
they were easily Rec combinable into the
uh installation of the need of the of
the
participants for example the Sonic
voids where we with the help of the pipe
we constructed this kind of spaces for
acoustic uh
experiments ER hosted ultrasonic
transducers which were installed within
the structure transforming drainage pipe
into the organic reverberating matter
opening free space for swamping
meditations it uses sound as a quaking
force that stabil destabilizes both
architectural space and and the
preconception of our role as Builders of
the
environment Helen and Newton Harrisons
and their early piece from the 70s
making Earth is yet another reference as
they are among the pioneers of the Eco
art and making of
commment they were role models for the
planners engaged in the worlding of
Earth so in light of accelerating
technological speed we look back at the
swamp to gain a different perception of
time and to realize it takes thousands
of years to swamp PLS to be formed
especially pit lands swamp plants are
adapted for slow growth accumulating
value for their healing cleaning and
antiseptic properties which are often
forgotten or even Unknown by Our
Generation it seems that the swamp
encompasses heterogeneous temporalities
as well as different systems of
knowledge indigenous or and
technoscientific premodern and Ultra
futuristic the G position of the
technological and organic must be
considered and
reconsidered swamp cultivation is always
a technological
interaction the courtyards that
surrounded swamp School space in Venice
were used to install the plants brought
from Oak to malamore in lethania SoCal
community of plants and supported uh was
supported by water filtration system and
represents very complex ecosystem that
was to survive the whole period of the
benal uh in collaboration with swamp
scientist from lethania it was a true
experiment moderated carefully and of
course taking care and maintained
carefully during the days of the
exhibition
structure of a sensing plant doodling
robots um is a next version of the swamp
model developed for the partially
swamped institution Exhibition at the
National Gallery of Art in vness the
former Museum of revolution in 2023 so
so this is uh between 2018 and 2003
there is already five six years um uh we
are engaging the um National um fund for
the conservation of the vetland in
Lithia and also swamp researchers in
other areas like in Kamar and other
places um in the world um and um for
this uh museum for the National Gallery
that is former Museum of
Revolution um we installed the model of
the vetland in the former Courtyard you
know and in that Museum of Revolution
they had on display the
achievements uh of the socialist society
and the big Chun of those achievements
were showcasing the transformation of
agricultural countries such as lethania
into Progressive and modern country so
this transformation included relocation
of people from the countryside or
disolated Farms into settlements and
draining of wetlands cutting of forest
uh to create create more fields for
grazing cattle build Collective farms uh
etc
etc so uh so these changes of
transformation of the country it's
landscape and Society were put on the
display so um so um the National Gallery
uh uh in a way try to sort of like um
silence kind of like the former presence
of the Museum of Revolution perhaps
because they could not find a way how to
deal with the past with the traumatic
past or maybe uh which we found could be
very interesting task to embrace in
whatever way this dialectical tension
between the you know past as a museum of
Revolution and uh recognizing the for
instead of suppressing it so we thought
that by bringing the swamp into this
Courtyard kind know like this premodern
swamp we could also in at certain uh
institutional critique with focus on the
vlands as places where humans could
learn uh from the multispecies
cohabitation also gain some experience
and wisdom on how to attune to changing
environment and also instability so
seeing swamps as a rep repressed
reflects also back to modernity and
Modern Life and that inspired us to
think uh in terms terms of
hybridity
so um of course it was challenge for the
museum when it came to aspect of care um
uh as the as swamps of course they need
to be taken care uh so but without um
going maybe much into
that um we could um say
that the museum even with all their
sustainability uh slogans and
Declarations of care are not really
equipped when it comes to doing it uh or
not all museums let's put it this way
and this instance illustrates the
structural lack within the museum
organization and staff uh so they could
uh transition from rhetoric to action at
the rhetorical level they may say that
everything is fantastic and want to
Stage projects of
care uh but in action uh when the nature
needs to be taken care of it requires
attention and reconfiguration of the
Museum of
organization and this could be one
example that
illustrates Yeah so basically to connect
the courtyard and the
swamp ER in the courtyard with the
exhibition Hall downstairs in the
National Gallery we had this
transitional object if you want the the
read we worked with the conservation
agency of the vetland in Lithuania and
learn that you know re has to be uh
moderated has to be cut in order to save
the the vetland which sounds like a
paradox but apparently it is true
so we looked at the possibilities you
know how to use the read and what would
be possible to do with it and
collaborated with the Bel Russian
chemist and teacher of the of
botania who was in Exile in Lithuania or
she still is in Exile in Lithuania so we
we collaborated with her and organized
the read paper making Workshop during
the period of the exhibition at the
National Gallery so from RE which was
like grown in the courtyard we could
like also make the paper with the
audience and then ER give it further for
the for the nonhuman entities like
robots to draw on that paper when it
dries so returning to the
swamp School the swamp
school we also would like to show you
like few examples from the workshop with
students of course we had like many
participants perhaps more than 300
participants who joined the swamp school
and there were like you know quite a few
projects developed so it's not maybe
just to
to mention just few of them but we will
do that because of the you know time
restrictions and uh in this case we
would like to show you the project by NA
students so we worked also with Andre
and and Marcos
ctin in that case where students
investigated Camp Alto one of the
islands in the Venetian Lagoon
historically this place
was a bar was a garbage spill that
accumulated by time to con con
constitute the island and in the end of
19th century it was made into a
fortification which later became again
obsolete after the first world war and
students cleaned one of the
bunkers ER and turned it into the
archive of bizar
assemblages plastic glates found on the
island and its Shores
um or we can also look at anthropic
souvenir Venetian soap uh um as a public
interface uh developed by MIT student
group uh drawing on how KINE malabu
conceptualizes the concept of Futurity
by exploiting The Duality of the French
term
voir that refers at one uh at the same
time to the state of being sure of what
is coming uh and of not knowing what is
coming it suggested an idea based on
Ancient Venetian soap sapon con Rosa
made from the city's swampy resources a
mix of garbage found in National
Pavilions uh so the project points at
the entropic dimension that inherently
complicates temporal relationships it is
souvenir a factual Trace which combines
past knowledge and rootedness in the
material hybrid
with anticipation of the
unpredictability of the
future another maybe project to mention
is making new land by Thomas pouch
Studio it is an interesting conversation
with an archaic
plant
cicoria this is nonhuman entity of the
important role in the history of the
city it offered the glass Artis sons of
Morana a local alternative to the
imported resource of soda ash a an
important component in glass making
outside of its
industrial human use cicoria also plays
a fundamental role in coastal intertial
what Wetlands it creates
land and emerging from the sea it its
roots gathered debris of minerals shell
sand and rock part particles aggregated
by the Sano bacterias and diatoms this
enriched soil becomes a fertile land for
other species to grow through material
and media experiments making new land
bridges Botanical research and human
imagination in the third chapter we were
working with Pascal galin sociologist
who believes that uh the least place
where the democracy is still possible is
Art he claims that everything has been
colonized by the capitalist system but
artists are still managing uh within the
art
circulation yes uh we have Art Market
and capitalism coming into art uh uh but
still artists are producing
interventions disobedient acts and
spaces of exception where freedom and
perhaps democracy are arguably possible
at least
temporarily uh so um within this chapter
uh we also collaborated with nicod do
from
ANP uh Art Academy and he joined with
the selection of the recipes you see uh
on the screen the recipe from
Rania uh that comes from his
grandmother uh and uh the were
um there were a group of artists who
sent their uh recipes uh with the
ingredients list so the group of the
students from the an
school during uh during the day when
everyone was preparing producing or
giving presentations they were chopping
carrots they were chopping Tomatoes
celery roots you know etc etc and uh
this rhythm of chopping and and the
rhythm of preparation of food was
following was setting certain tone in
the school uh during this uh uh chapter
of the
communism um
so yeah the food for commment and food
for life you know this was the also as
we can see uh Andre here uh with maros
cotini and the group of the students
from nabba school um in parallel to the
swamp School the same uh summer we gave
also workshop and at NABA and
participants uh in that Workshop each of
them they develop their own
interventions looking at
the um ecosystems of the Venetian Lagoon
and what is edible what is not edible
what can be transformed from maybe uh
not edible or maybe just
culturally um considerate not edible uh
maybe something that could be considered
as fermented you know and maybe there
are ways of also changing uh from not
edible into edible by applying different
uh ways of treating uh uh so and
considering different processes maybe
processes that are coming from also
other cultures you know so uh so this
also expanded on this uh cultural kind
of Notions you know expanding what is uh
um yeah what is kind of like possible
what is not possible and how we could
also take care um of our bodies in
relation kind of like of enriching the
uh diversity and
biodiversity and uh reconsidering the
monocultures right you know like so by
expanding uh by expanding in that
territory uh and then maybe for the end
we would like
mention T
fiction it is a project from
Iceland and a group of Architects uh
sociologist
artists uh is created this project to
expand the sociability beyond the
humans they work to restore islandic
vernacular
house the modernization of Iceland led
to destruction of these houses the
ecosystem of that house where the where
the soil different fungi bacteria and
microorganisms a aing is called Turf
house and of course it has its own
microbiome the researchers calculated
1,
631 bacteria and
697 ararot species in the sample of such
house all these different species contri
to the human immune system so the humans
living in the turf house under the
extreme conditions that Iceland has stay
healthy the turf is so healthy so you
can even eat it ER during the workshop
we were tasting the
Earth
[Music]
um from the big Chun of the torf house
sliced like a bread
so yeah so the value of the swamps as
eatons and as transitory ecosystems is
acknowledged in the in these public
interfaces uh public interfaces as kind
of like forms that connect the
participants between themselves the uh
ecosystem of the Venetian Lagoon and
also the public and and of course you
know public here is not only the
visitors to the banal but the people who
are living and we connected in Venice
you know and we connected with homeless
people
Association uh with citizens of Castello
area with locals of
Venice um and um so this public
interface is developed as a way to
engage these audiences uh and also
environment that that they
represent uh the swamps cannot be
contained the swamp school also Leakes
through his chapters smuggling knowledge
between art and Community Art and Design
art and other fields and inspires
projects and sites of
Engagement uh so we could also share
with you the exploratory swamp game it
me that is developed with members of mat
climate Vision Group that invites that
invites users to experience the Sy
poetic relations so uh so please tell us
if we still have time to share with you
the
game yeah I would say that we do that
and then we have some questions okay
okay okay
good so as we discussed earlier swamp is
a perfect M to sense fragile
interdependencies between organisms and
their
habitats here every member of the
community is part of every other
member's environment as well as
necessary for the survival of the whole
so this swamp game probes the change of
perspective and allows us to embody
different species by touching swamp and
creatures plants insects birds
amphibians fungi bacteria or
algae uh to discover the main rule of
cannibal metaphysics to become the other
you have to be
eaten so again this game is inspired by
the biotop model model of the a m more
that you uh that you already learned
from the previous example uh that's what
this German botanist Weber conducted the
first scientific study of that
L uh and the creatures uh dwelling in
the game are inspired by Weber's
drawings as well as they are informed by
the data that is collected by the
biologist with whom we collaborated
during these year years um since
2017 when we started to work with the B
LS and
uh
[Music]
yeah yeah
so the game kind of like uh
luring you into the you know different
colors and sounds and the different
speeds and different times and changes
our perception like through this chamon
colors or aberration of
three-dimensional space disoriented pace
of
movement um and this messy and irritant
swamp gives us opportunity to test IDE
of syis which is collectively forming
and becoming together together in order
to find new ethos of coexistence and
this is basically what what brings us to
the swamps you know like this is our uh
you know something that draws us to the
swamp is is to recognize this poetical
and political power of the ecist uh that
are all around
us so yeah thank you we could continue
but maybe it would be a good time for us
to stop now and
um and see if you have any questions
yeah we have quite a few more leaks of
the school like for example and many
others but yeah maybe I quickly go
through them because it's it was very
interesting because it's a for you also
a project that you continue that you
kind of developed and that unfolds in
various forms uh uh and in various
places so maybe you can just show a few
images more and then we can have some
questions okay so yes the this is a
Futurity
Island I think yeah I wanted to see like
there are some questions maybe uh but we
continue
okay okay
so yes as we mentioned the earlier the
swamp maintains this leaking characters
so the school
also was pretty pretty open and uh many
things which started there in 2018 and
during that half a year of the of the
period of the Bal continued in different
shapes afterwards and still H we are
kind of like still in the swamp we you
know it really like holds us there
doesn't allow us to escape so fut island
is one of of the uh outcomes or let's
say a leaks from the or yeah or ripples
of the of the Swarm school it also
borrows the same name from the second
chapter of the school and uh it
originated as a proposal actually for
the Pavilion but it was never realized
in Venice though uh we got an invitation
from the curator uh from the uh
missa university university Toronto
University in missa in
Canada who organized this very
interesting uh uh exhibition outside of
the of Toronto in a very industrial
heavily Industrial
Area there and so Christina sha that's
curator's name uh she's created
Blackwood gallery
uh in Toronto missa University she
invited a group of artists and US among
that group uh to engage uh with this
polluted environment of the industrial
serur of
Toronto um and um and also um helped to
uh connect artists with the industries
so on one hand you have this in polluted
environment on the other hand you have
industries that are contributing to that
pollution so um so uh this work that was
assembled from the materials that we uh
scavenged
onite um they were donated by the in
Industries uh and as you can see this is
this um high density uh plastic pipes
that are used typically they used for
the transportation of the water and uh
we are assembling them in the specific
uh spatial Arrangement that helps to
amplifies the uh amphibian songs uh so
you have
the uh sound uh that is being uh uh
reverberated by the
system and the sound is coming uh from
uh actually the pollution data that is
filtered through the body of the uh
hydros py so
yeah to translate from Latin it is the
soul of the water hydros but in fact it
is the cadis
fly um um Quite A peculiar uh life form
that lives as a larva under the water
for the big Chun of its life and uses
its saliva uh to build this incredible
pipe like uh habitats you know it's like
incredible architect
um and um and its condition um it's U um
basically livelihood is actually the
sensor for the for the uh water quality
right so we're looking with the
Environmental Protection Agency of
Canada we are looking into how the local
company that that is called the Clean
Harbors manages to use
the um bu remediation technology to uh
to actually detoxify the soil the toxic
soil that they bring and the toxic mud
in fact that they bring from the
different harbors of the Ontario
province of the of the lakes in Ontario
so allegedly this use of the plants
helps to detoxify but we wanted to
really look you know how much you know
how well they succeeding so this project
uh again involved this students um and
collaboration with Scientists with
agency uh collaboration between us as
artist and architect IND Bret uh and um
with whom we collaborating on this
spatial arrangement of the pipes and
also Nicole Kier who is um electronic
sound artist and the
composer uh uh to produce uh these songs
of the crying planet or amphibian
songs okay so thank you maybe we could
stop uh here because I know that the
project had also many other forms how it
developed um digital and and analogue um
what I wanted to ask you from my side
maybe a quick question and maybe then um
also we could take some questions from
the audience uh it was like um I'm
always amazed by this kind of our
which seems almost infinite of of
different kind of strategies that you
put into play and and and there are
elements of playfulness there are
elements of
carnivalesque uh there are very
interesting also the way how you work
with language how you sort of transform
certain things and and bend certain
Concepts and adapt them to what you're
doing and um and also how you managed to
to transform and then to incorporate
also various media in the end it seems
frequently you know U beautiful images
and but through this experience also
there is something fundamental that I
think comes to the for which is like
really I think that today um more than
ever there's a kind of little bit slck
and and um and and of of the imaginary
how where where to go next like it seems
like this is a very strange moment in
history and uh and I always felt that
whenever we
collaborate some
always managed to somehow hack uh that
kind of desperate situation and open up
new ways how you can look at things and
uh so yeah where where does this kind of
inventiveness comes from and and what is
the like political aspect also of that
because I remember when we did the
Disobedience archive in the lobby of MIT
it was probably the most crazy project
have been part of and I never thought we
would manage we actually brought this
soil and this corporate Lobby and put
the protest films like uh and which was
quite extraordinary like really to
somehow yeah to hack the spaces that
that normally would not allow actually
anything similar inside so maybe you
could just comment on on on that it was
not really a question maybe more kind of
comment that I brought
up thank you Andreas it was
beautiful uh I'm happy it is recorded
yeah where the joy and the creativity
comes
from that's a good
question well you know like uh we didn't
show you this uh last chapter um um or
maybe the the yeah kind of like you know
the one that we developed working with
children in gotland Island uh and this
was during during the pandemic and of
course pandemic you know came as this uh
um moment of History uh that was this uh
radical dis disruption on the global
scale on the planetary scale and perhaps
uh also for the first time we had to
very very vividly Embrace care right the
concept of care uh we started to speak
about care workers you know like the
care workers became kind of like one of
the perhaps most used words uh globally
and and the care kind of like self- care
but also Collective care care of the
other you know like became really the
modes of uh of survival and
uh uh and uh um you know in actually um
we also were looking into kind of like
political motivation you of engaging
children and in this like super
challenging time and I think at that
time we also found some inspiration uh
looking at the work of auds the uh
um now I'm I'm blanking um but um of
this Russian name of the Russian poet
but is he was one of the me if you could
maybe help help me maybe niika you could
help me what was this name of this
um
[Music]
um harms harms thank you yeah Daniel
harms thank you yeah one of these
members of aerot movement yes uh so um
so danal harms uh also um wrote uh books
for children you know so basically he he
engaged children right in this uh
extremely precarious moment you know of
History right you know when the horrible
things were happening you know with the
you know the Tyranny you know the
repressions you know but then suddenly
he was like writing this absur kind of
like uh seemingly absur maybe but but it
was kind of uh you know trying to sort
of like connect the pragmatics and
fiction you know but something that goes
beyond the brutal rationality you know
of the world and uh and um and I know
that maybe this is not precise answer
where we find this energy
to um to invent to circumvent you know
to find motivation you know uh but uh
but finding the sort of like really you
know inspiration maybe not um in
the h
maybe finding this inspiration kind of
like really to find maybe some
estrangement you know with the reality
maybe finding inspiration to like in the
third kind of like point you know third
point maybe that is coming kind of like
from um as a cultural filter you know
you could say you know we have this like
internal terms you know like but one of
these terms you know using is cultural
filter so in a way harms is suddenly
becomes the cultural filter we not
necessarily mentioning you know it's not
you know the project is not about harms
you know but but in a way the the
motivation kind of like you know to
think uh about how to propel how to
proceed may come from the
seemingly um you know unrelated you know
uh time or the period of the history but
suddenly we insert that as a cultural
lens you
know so this is like you know you could
say you could say some kind of like
technique you know you know like you
know like uh it could be some uh
technique uh military technique like a
smoke screen you know if you want to
hide something you know or or in
literature it can also be some you know
technique like a red heading technique
when you try to sort of like distract
the viewer and introduce parallel
narrative you know uh and uh um and get
to the moment of the surprise right but
but these different kind of like
techniques
uh um are important for us to um to
think about U you know to think about
the process as a form you know like not
necessarily to think about the final uh
uh product as you as you notice we have
this very muddy artist you know so we
are working in collaboration you know
like sometimes this collaborations leak
from our small Collective into the
larger Collective sometimes into
collectives of dozens and maybe even
hundreds of people you know as it was
the case of the protest lab you know
that was hundreds of people and it was
like you know almost 10
years um including the lawsuits but um
you know but uh but the motivation is
really coming from from this indulg into
thinking about the process as a form you
know so even if if if we are saying we
are we interested in mud and we
interested in the formless of mud you
know or formlessness of mud you know
there is still I would still argue there
is a certain form in that
formlessness yeah okay thank you um I
was curious if maybe there are some
other
questions so somebody from uh Nic before
asked also here on the chat uh some
questions but uh are there any questions
from the audience
okay Sika asked how can we collaborate
how can other people participate in your
projects yes so it depends on the
project but uh uh the swamp
school had an open call in the very
beginning of course it was happening in
Lithuania so you know like Lithuanian
Architects and designers arst
whoever wanted and whoever heard of that
call could join and through that call
actually we found very very U great
collaborators with whom we are still
working up to now and became like really
very very close productive team in the
end so uh it depends on the project but
uh yes you know sometimes we have open
calls and we invite everyone to join one
school was joined also later during the
process by many many participants and uh
and you know we did like several things
with them at that time and then in a
after like several years you know they
appear again and now we have again like
meeting the same people and and working
with them so it always depends on the
project some projects are uh targeting
certain like communities for example
like I just showed like few slides from
the collaboration with children on
gotland isand where we you know
developed the augmented reality app but
with children so of course then we
targeted certain like U school like just
primary school or middle school and uh
and a class which wanted to collaborate
so we found teachers we found a class
which was eager to join the project and
and you know engage in this dialogue
yeah but but actually it is very much
kind of like biotop
inspired pedagogy that we interested so
uh so we really sort of like looking uh
to those school who would be interested
in uh engaging this type of pedagogy you
know so um and um so so definitely we
are very much open for these kind of
collaborations uh also um uh in the past
year we've been working on the vland
role playing game uh where the STI
holders uh that represent the diverse
socioeconomic roles uh that are thriving
in the vlands uh um um they U they are
engaged into kind of like uh diplomacy
game uh uh when it comes to the certain
agreements and disagreements how the
vetland can be managed as ecosystem you
know so one very particular example we
just uh we just tested with students
from Marse University in Kamar which is
one of the biggest vlands on
Mediterranean Sea south of
France uh and U and the participants
were wearing hats of the rice Farmers uh
or the duck hunters and uh or the Reed
Harvesters uh or the fish fisherman uh
and and uh and the whole big vetland uh
which is organized uh specially as
public domain and the private domain uh
participants had to discuss water uh
Management regimes in that big territory
right so they had to agree on the
certain Water Management which of course
affects the uh affects kind of like the
future of the environment uh depending
on the socioeconomic roles depending on
how people would behave and what kind of
like uh you know economic activities
they would have and uh and that game um
allows to see the development of the
environment how how environment would
transform depending on this human impact
in the course of seven years so it is
really based on the data that is
collected by the scientist for the past
30 years or more uh and also what is
interesting that one of the roles we had
next to human agents we had non-human
agents like bird so that is particular
bird bitter you know the bird that this
has this very particular kind of like
strong voice you know and it's like uh
um so uh so again to have students also
wearing the Hat of the bird you know
wearing the Hat of the hunter you know
creates certain uh certain negotiation
certain kind of like dialectics and
certain change of the perspective
actives you know so so for example um
yeah how to collaborate you know
like uh we would definitely welcome
participants from other um uh places
that are in proximity to these Wetlands
so we could test this kind of game uh in
those locations you know um uh where uh
the humans um and the agents in the
environment are engaged in some you know
agreements or disagreements conflicts
and they're looking for the forms of
diplomacy all right fantastic um I was
wondering if now there are any other
questions from the audience because we
are quite already 10 minutes over time
uh if there is any comments or
any yes M you wanted to say something
please
no
okay amazing projects for a long time
and really appreciate a lot your
approach to pedy and research and
special thanks for
hars thank you thank you much yeah it's
it's a shame that you know like uh yeah
I was blanking on on on the name but but
I'm I'm so happy to have like informed
audience you know
so I had you know we had big Choice from
vens to harms kind of like to choose
from but hars you know HS HS for us was
for Our Generation harms was inspiration
you know since '
80s
yeah sorry Andre yeah and I think maybe
strangely enough it is very adequate
also for what's just happened in the
States and what just Happ happening in
the world because it's really kind of
absurd uh to say the least so so this
approach is also maybe U kind of useful
uh today so uh to end up maybe I wanted
just to to add that we have been um
recently also together with niika and
other members of the Museum of care we
have been to St Vincent and uh and there
is a possibility and then project that
maybe kind of school or David greber
Institute wants to do do a project there
so I hope if if Nika realizes that there
will be an an opportunity to to realize
and to test different pedagogical
strategies on that ground and um uh
apart that I'm very happy that we can
continue this kind of discussion and uh
and uh these presentations on pedagogy I
think it's a very important tool and
very closely linked also to to to the
work of David gber and how he was
working this is also yet another project
which which you haven't presented but
maybe we can do a second round with you
someday because there would be many many
things to present and I think one of the
great things is that um uh perhaps yeah
I mentioned the project Disobedience
archive I felt that around the time of
of the Occupy Movement uh there was a
feeling that there were also certain
artists uh there was a kind of community
and feeling that there was um an
international kind of network of people
sort of collaborating and knowing about
each other's work and and I think
recently that has been disrupted so
maybe these encounters could become also
a way how the the different practices
could reconnect because I think it's
also important to to kind of keep on
developing and uh and maybe reactivate
this kind of network on a planetary
scale so thank you everyone who
connected thanks to you NZ and I hope we
can host you maybe soon online or in
presence thanks everyone thank you thank
you byee bye bye have a nice
evening so shall we stay and have a
drink now
or I don't know um yeah n thanks and